\input amigatexinfo
\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename Triton.info
@settitle Triton
@iftex
@afourpaper
@end iftex
@finalout
@comment %**end of header

@c @setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@sp 5
@center @titlefont{Triton}
@sp 4
@center An object oriented GUI creation system
@sp 4
@center Release OpenTriton 2.0
@sp 4
@center @copyright{} 1993-1998 by Stefan Zeiger.
@end titlepage

@node Top, INT_INT, (dir), (dir)
@ifinfo
@example
       **********************************************
               __________ __  __   _____________
              /__  _____//_/_/ /_ /____________/
                / /____ __ /  __/______ ____
               / // __// / / /  / __  // __ \\
              / // /  / / / /_ / /_/ // / / /
             /_//_/  /_/ /___//_____//_/ /_/

@end example

@center An object oriented GUI creation system.

@center Release OpenTriton 2.0

@center (c) 1993-1998 Stefan Zeiger

@center **********************************************

@end ifinfo

@menu

Introduction

* Introduction    :INT_INT.       What the heck is Triton?
* Copyright       :INT_COP.       Freeware/Shareware
* Installation    :INT_INS.       How to install Triton
* Usage           :INT_USE.       How to use Triton GUIs

Preferences editor

* Introduction    :PRE_INT.       Why a preferences editor?
* Usage           :PRE_USE.       How to use the editor

Odds & Ends

* Astronomy lesson:ODD_AST.       For your information and entertainment
* Acknowledgments :ODD_ACK.       Whom I have to thank...
* Support         :ODD_SUP.       How to contact the author
* Updates         :ODD_UPD.       How to obtain new Triton releases

* History         :(History)main. The version history

* Glossary        :Glossary.
* Index           :Index.

@end menu

@example
@*
@end example

@ifinfo
Note that all pages can be reached directly from this menu,
so that you may conveniently browse through all items in this
main menu in order to read the entire documentation.

The developer documentation can be found in the directory
@file{Developer} of the Triton developer archive.
@end ifinfo

@node INT_INT, INT_COP, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction
@section Introduction
@cindex Introduction

Triton is a standard Amiga shared runtime library.  Triton makes it much
easier to create good looking graphical user interfaces (GUIs) than
GadTools, BOOPSI or other systems.

The most important features are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Object oriented system
@item
Automatically font sensitive, font adaptive
@item
Automatic keyboard shortcuts for default window actions
@item
@emph{Really} easy to use
@item
Beautiful customizable AmigaOS3.x look
@item
Comes as a freely distributable shared library
@item
Size! It's the Triton among the minnows of GUI creation systems ;)
@item
Easy installation: For a quick installation simply put triton.library
into @file{Libs:} or the current directory.
@item
Resizability of windows wherever applicable
@item
A Preferences editor which allows you to customize the look and feel of all
Triton GUIs
@item
No installation required. Simply putting triton.library into the current
directory is enough for a minimum installation.
@end itemize

By using Triton you don't have to worry about otherwise very time-consuming
things like font-sensitivity and resizability of your windows.  What is
even more important is that you can easily change your user interfaces
later without having to rearrange display objects.  Simply add an object to
a group and the whole GUI will adapt to make room for it.

@node INT_COP, INT_INS, INT_INT, Top
@section Copyright
@cindex Copyright

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

@strong{Exception to the above:} The icons used in the Triton package
were created and are copyrighted by Michael-Wolfgang Hohmann
(mickh@@iM.Net) and may not be used in other projects without his
written permission. The agreement to use these icons for the Triton
distribution has been given.

@strong{Note:} Registered trademarks are not explicitly marked as such in this
manual. If a name is not marked as a trademark, this does not imply that it
is free.

@node INT_INS, INT_USE, INT_COP, Top
@section Installation
@cindex Installation

First of all, Triton requires at least OS2.04.  If you're still running 1.2
or 1.3, you have to upgrade to OS2.04 or better.  OS1.3 is @emph{obsolete}
and I will not support it.  You certainly won't regret upgrading to OS3.1.

The user relevant parts of Triton (i.e.  the contents of the user archive)
can be installed comfortably using the supplied installer scripts. In
order to save space, the required @file{Installer} program is not
included in the Triton archive.  @file{Installer} is included in the
AmigaOS system software beginning with OS release 3.0 and can also be found
as a freely distributable archive on many BBSs and ftp sites.

If you're running OS2.0x, use the @file{Install/Workbench_2.0} installer
script.  If you're running OS2.1 or better, use the script for your
preferred language from the @file{Install/Workbench_2.1+} drawer. Note that
not all installation scripts are fully localized. Unlocalized strings will
be displayed in English.

Two versions of triton.library are included in this distribution.  The one
in libs37 requires OS2.04 or better, the one in libs39 requires OS3.0 or
better and is optimized for OS3.0+, so that it is shorter and will run
slightly faster than the OS2.04 version on an OS3.0+ system.  The OS3.0+
version cannot be used with OS2.0/2.1. Beginning with Triton release 2.0
the OS3.0+ version of the library also requires an 68020 or better processor
and is optimized for a 68030. I assume that most Amiga users who are still
interested in new software and use OS3.0 or better do also have at least a
68020 processor. Note that the V37 version will behave exactly like the
V39 version on V39+ systems. It is only a bit larger and slower than the
native version.

@node INT_USE, PRE_INT, INT_INS, Top
@section Usage
@cindex Usage
@cindex Programmer
@cindex Developer

The usage of a Triton GUI should be pretty clear.  All windows have two
additional keyboard shortcuts (if not explicitly disabled by the
application):

@itemize @bullet
@item
'Esc' will simulate the 'close window' gadget.
@item
'Del' will simulate the 'resize window' gadget.
@end itemize

Furthermore, various objects react on some standard keyboard shortcuts:

@itemize @bullet
@item
In palette, slider, scroller and
similar gadgets with an up/down facility you can use the shifted shortcut
to decrease the value.
@item
Listviews can be controlled with either the cursor keys (@code{Shift}ed
and @code{Alt}ernate shortcuts are also available) or the numeric
keypad (including the numeric arrow keys, @code{Home}, @code{End},
@code{PgUp} and @code{PgDn}). The programmer may choose to disable
these shortcuts, mainly in order to make the primary listview accessable
via the cursor keys and the secondary listview via the numeric keypad.
@item
Within string gadgets, @code{Tab} and @code{Shift Tab} will activate the
previous/next string gadget as usual. You can access all keyboard shortcuts
by pressing them together with the right Amiga key (@code{RAmiga}). If no
such shortcut exists, Triton will instead try to interpret the key you pressed
as a menu shortcut. You may use the cursor up and down keys normally from
within string gadgets to control a listview.
@item
You can cancel a button which has been pressed down with a keyboard shortcut
by pressing down either @code{Shift} key before releasing the shortcut.
This is similar to releasing the mouse button outside the borders of a button.
@end itemize

For information on how to use Triton as a programmer for developing Triton
applications, see the developer documentation which is included in the
Triton developer archive in the directory @file{Developer}.

@node PRE_INT, PRE_USE, INT_USE, Top
@chapter Preferences editor
@cindex Preferences editor
@cindex Editor, Preferences
@section Introduction

The Triton Preferences Editor allows you to customize the look and feel
of applications which are using the Triton GUI creation system.

The Triton Preferences Editor allows you to change basically two kinds
of settings:

@enumerate
@item
Global settings for all Triton applications (e.g.@: public screens).
@item
Private application settings.
@end enumerate

Note that the listed global application @code{<<Global>>} belongs to the
second type, too.  If an application is created, it will inherit the global
application's settings.  Thus all applications without own settings will
use the global settings.  As soon as you change any setting of an
application, it will become independant and will not inherit future changes
of the global application.  If you want to delete an application's private
settings and make it use the global settings again (including inheriting
future changes to them), select the menu item @code{Edit/Reset To Global}.
This system may sound a bit complicated to you, but it is quite easy to
handle.

@node PRE_USE, ODD_AST, PRE_INT, Top
@section Usage

Main window menu @code{Project}:

The Triton Preferences Editor can be installed by hand by simply dragging
it into the 'Prefs' drawer of your boot partition (@file{sys:Prefs}).  Then
start the editor and confirm that you want to install the Preferences
System.  It may be removed again later by selecting 'Project/Remove' in the
editor's main window's menu.

Main window menu @code{Edit}:

This menu contains all standard items plus @code{Reset to Global}
(@pxref{PRE_INT, Preferences editor - Introduction, Preferences editor - Introduction}).
All changes made from within this menu do only apply to the currently
selected application.

Main window gadgets:

@code{Save}, @code{Use} and @code{Cancel} should be self-explaining.  They
apply to all modified settings of all applications.  @code{Test} will
restart the Preferences editor using the current settings without saving
anything.

@code{Info} will give you all information available about the selected
application.  This includes name, version, compilation date and so on.

@code{Delete} will delete an application, i.e.  its settings and
information files.  You have to restart the application to make it appear
in the Triton Preferences Editor again.  If you just want to delete an
application's private settings, use @code{Edit/Reset to Global}.

The gadget @code{System} opens the system window which contains all global
settings.  All other gadgets open windows for private application settings.

@code{Frames} window:

The frames window allows you to configure the look of frames and groups.
This should be mostly self-explaining.

@code{Images} window:

You can change some default Triton images (e.g.@: window backgrounds) in
this window.

With @code{Use <Return> arrow in buttons} you can decide
how buttons which can be activated by pressing @code{<Return>} will be highlighted.
If you check the gadget, these buttons will have an arrow on the right side. By default
they will have their label displayed in @b{bold} text instead.

@code{Pens} window:

In this window you can change some Triton pens. Especially important are
@code{Halfshine} and @code{Halfshadow} which are used for rendering
frames in @code{XEN 1}, @code{XEN 2} and @code{NeXT} look.

Also listed among these pens are the foregrounds and backgrounds of
string gadgets. From a logical point of view the backgrounds should
rather be images than pens but due to limitations of AmigaOS this is
technically not possible.

@code{Windows} window:

This window contains the Triton window manager.  The list shows all windows
of the selected application which have been opened since the last reboot or
are saved permanently to @file{envarc:Triton}.  The windows are displayed
by their titles (if available; otherwise the ID number in square brackets).
If you close a Triton window, Triton will remember its last dimensions in a
file in @file{env:Triton}, so that it will have the same dimensions when
you reopen it.  If you want to keep the window dimensions permanently, so
that they are always available (unless you change them later on), select
the appropriate window and click on @code{Snapshot}.  This system works
just like the window snapshotting of the Amiga Workbench.  If you want
Triton to "forget" a custom window position and reposition the window
according to the original positioning information (e.g.@: centering the
window on the screen after choosing a new screen resolution), you can
@code{UnSnapshot} the window.  The gadgets @code{Snapshot all} and
@code{UnSnapshot all} will (un)snapshot all windows of the currently
selected application.  The gadget @code{Info} will bring up a requester
containing some information about the currently selected window.

@code{System} window:

The system window contains all global settings. The most important one of those
is the public screen manager. You can add, delete and edit public
screens.  Double click on a screen or select @code{Use} and the name of the
screen will be copied into the above string gadget.  This is the screen for
the currently selected application.  You may also type in any other screen
name (either of an existing public screen or of a public screen which is
managed by the Triton public screen manager).

When Triton opens a window, it will first look if the specified
screen exists and use it in this case.  Otherwise it will try to create
it if an entry for this screen can be found in the screen manager.  If this
doesn't work either, Triton will fall back onto the default public screen.
You can test how a screen will look by selecting @code{Test}.  The screen
will be opened and can be closed again by closing the information window
which is displayed in it.  Note that the screen will not be made public when testing.

The screen manager settings override any specifications made by
the programmer.  Setting an application's screen to @code{<<Program
default>>} will make it use the screen specified by the programmer.
However only public and workbench screen windows can be promoted using the
screen manager.  Custom screen windows will always open on the custom
screen specified in the application.

Except for the public screen manager, the @code{System} window currently
contains only one switch: @code{Simple refresh}. Select it to make all
windows use @code{Simple} instead of @code{Smart} refresh. This will require
less memory but make the refresh slower und worse looking (at least with the
standard AGA graphics - I haven't tried it with a graphics board).

@node ODD_AST, ODD_ACK, PRE_USE, Top
@chapter Odds & Ends
@cindex Odds & Ends
@section Astronomy lesson
@cindex Astronomy lesson

@center Triton - A moon of Neptune
@center (by Michael Berg)

Triton is a quaint little moon, in that it is one of the very few moons
to be known to have retrograde orbits around their host.  Triton is believed
to be a 3-6000 km large world of mostly liquid nitrogen oceans, perhaps
with a thin methane atmosphere as well, but noone knows for sure since
either of the Voyager twins ever got close enough to take convincing
snapshots.

Neptune itself is also quite strange in that it has an almost 90 degree
tilted inclination, so that it "rolls" through space, unlike Earth and the
other planets (minus Venus), which all spin like tops in their orbits.
Noone can tell for sure why Neptune has such an eccentric inclination, but
it has been suggested that it was caused by a gigantic collision of some
sort (probably with a large asteroid).  In the process Neptune also lost
its third moon, which at the time was none other than Pluto.  The collision
accelerated Pluto to the point where it had enough momentum to actually
leave its orbit and shoot into space on its own.  As it did so it probably
passed below the Roche' radius of Neptune, causing it to break up in two or
more bodies under the influence of the massive tidal forces of Neptune.
This would certainly account for Charon, which is in itself too large to
have been "captured" by an object as small as Pluto.

Okay, end of today's astronomy lesson :-)

@node ODD_ACK, ODD_SUP, ODD_AST, Top
@section Acknowledgments
@cindex Acknowledgments
@cindex Credits
@cindex Thanks

Thanks must go to (in more or less random order):

@itemize @bullet
@item
The Triton 2.0 beta-testers:

Magnus Holmgren, Nils Sjoholm, Volker Stolz, Patrick Ohly, Jürgen Kohrmeyer,
Carsten Raufuß, Matthias Andree, Heikki Linnakangas, Stefan 'eau' Schulz,
Michael Bergmann, Klaus Melchior, Philipp Lonke, Tom Eicher, Uffe Holst,
Marco Frischkorn

@item
The Triton 1.x beta-testers:

Nico François, Carsten Raufuß, Michael Berg, Magnus Holmgren,
Marco Frischkorn, Patrick Ohly, Daniel Schrod
and everyone else I have forgotten

@item
The catalog translators:

Philipp Lonke for the French translation and the BlitzBasic interface
Magnus Holmgren for the Swedish translation and the DICE interface
Frank Verheyen for the Dutch translation and the AmigaE interface

@item
The authors of developer support material:

Philipp Lonke (BlitzBasic), Magnus Holmgren (DICE),
Frank Verheyen (AmigaE), Gunther Nikl (gcc),
Klaus Melchior (DICE), Peter Fröhlich (AmigaOberon),
Volker Stolz (AmigaOberon), Oskar Liljeblad (Assembler),
Stefan Schulz (M2Amiga), Sotirios Pappas (KickPascal/MaxonPascal),

@item
Jürgen Kohrmeyer for writing @code{TritonRexx}

@item
Kai Iske for his BOOPSI class sources

@item
Michael Berg for the 'Astronomy Lesson'

@item
Tom Eicher and Everett M. Greene for proof-reading the documentation

@item
Michael 'Mick' Hohmann for the icons

@item
The people at iM.Net for running the Triton mailing list

@item
Everyone I've forgotten
@end itemize

@cindex Software
@cindex Products
I have used the following software products for creating Triton:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The C sources were compiled with @emph{SAS/C 6.56}. With SAS/C it was possible
to create Triton without a single line of assembly language code.

@item
The sources and the documentation were edited with @emph{GNU Emacs
18.59} on my Amiga and @emph{XEmacs 19.13} on my Linux PC.

@item
The documentation was written in Texinfo and formatted using @emph{PasTeX} and @emph{makeinfo}.

@item
Shell commands were entered in @emph{KingCON} and @emph{xterm} windows ;-)
@end itemize

@node ODD_SUP, ODD_UPD, ODD_ACK, Top
@section Support
@cindex Author
@cindex Contacting the author
@cindex Support

If you have suggestions or remarks about Triton, or if you find any bugs,
please let me know.

@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex
@center @b{@i{Contacting the author:}}
@itemize @bullet
@item
@b{EMail:}@*
szeiger@@usa.net

@item
@b{Mail:}@*
Stefan Zeiger@*
Seligenstädter Weg 24@*
D-63796 Kahl@*
Germany

@item
@b{Voice:}@*
+49-6188-900712
@end itemize


@cindex WWW
@cindex World Wide Web
@cindex Home Page
You can also find this information on my WWW home page at
@code{http://home.pages.de/~szeiger/}.


@node ODD_UPD, Glossary, ODD_SUP, Top
@section Updates
@cindex Updates
@cindex BBS
@cindex ftp

If you have access to the World Wide Web (WWW), the easiest way of obtaining
a new version of Triton or getting information about Triton is the
Triton Home Page at @code{http://home.pages.de/~szeiger/triton.html}.
You can follow links from this page to AmiNet ftp sites that carry the latest
Triton archives.

@node Glossary, Index, ODD_UPD, Top
@unnumbered Glossary
@cindex Glossary
@cindex BOOPSI
@cindex DICE
@cindex Endless loop
@cindex FD software
@cindex GCC
@cindex GUI
@cindex Loop, endless
@cindex SAS/C

@table @samp

@item BOOPSI
Basic Object Oriented Programming System for Intuition. See the BOOPSI
chapter of the RKM ("ROM Kernel Manual") volume "Libraries" for details.

@item DICE
Dillon's Integrated C Environment. A C development system for AmigaOS.

@item Endless loop
See @samp{Loop, endless}.

@item FD software
Freely distributable software, including @samp{Public Domain (PD)},
@samp{Freeware}, @samp{Giftware}, @samp{Shareware}, etc.

@item GCC
@samp{GNU C}: The C compiler of the "Free Software Foundation". This
compiler and its development system is freely distributable and a port is
also available for AmigaOS.

@item GUI
Graphical User Interface.

@item Loop, endless
See @samp{Endless loop}.

@item SAS/C
A commercial C development system for AmigaOS.
@end table

@node Index, , Glossary, Top
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp
@contents
@bye
